README.md, before:

This gem implements Ruby bindings for the [Howcast](http://howcast.com) API.

From Howcast's [About Us](http://info.howcast.com/about) page:

> Howcast empowers people with engaging, useful how-to information wherever, 
> whenever they need to know how. 
> 
> Known for high-quality content, Howcast streams tens of millions of videos 
> every month across its multi-platform distribution network. Approaching two 
> million downloads across iPhone, iPad, Android, and BlackBerry phones, Howcast 
> is the #1 mobile app for instructional content -- wherever you are.

Install
-------

    gem install howkast

Configure
---------
Most of the service requests require an API key. You can either set this when
you create an instance of `Howkast::API`:

    howcast = Howkast::API.new :api_key => 'YOUR-API-KEY'
    howcast.categories

Or create a configuration that file and set it by invoking the `Howkast::configure`
method:

    # create the configuration file
    cat > ~/.howkast <<EOF
    :api_key: YOUR-API-KEY
    EOF
    
    # now use it
    require 'rubygems'
    require 'yaml'
    require 'howkast'
    
    Howkast::configure YAML.load File.read('~/.howkast')
    howcast = Howkast::API.new
    howcast.categories

Quickstart
----------

    require 'rubygems'
    require 'yaml'
    begin
      require 'howkast'
    rescue LoadError
      $LOAD_PATH.unshift(File.join(File.dirname(__FILE__), '..', 'lib'))
      require 'howkast'
    end

    # configure
    Howkast::configure YAML.load File.read('.howkast')

    # create instance
    howcast = Howkast::API.new

    # alternative instantiation
    # howcast = Howkast::API.new :api_key => 'YOUR-HOWCAST-API-KEY'

    # search for jujitsu how-to videos
    search = howcast.search :query => 'jujitsu'

    # get detail for the first video listed in the search
    video_id = search.videos.first.id
    video    = howcast.video :id => video_id
    puts video.title
    puts video.embed

    # find out what other videos where uploaded by the same user
    username = video.username
    user     = howcast.user :id => username, :resource => :videos
    puts user.title
    user.videos.each do |video|
      puts "- #{video.id}\t#{video.title}"
    end

    # list user's favorite videos
    user = howcast.user :id => username, :resource => :favorites
    puts user.title
    user.videos.each do |video|
      puts "- #{video.id}\t#{video.title}\t#{video.description}"
    end

    # list user's playlists
    user = howcast.user :id => username, :resource => :playlists
    puts user.title
    user.playlists.each do |video|
      puts "- #{video.id}\t#{video.title}"
    end

    # list available categories
    categories = howcast.categories
    categories.each do |category|
      puts "#{category.id}\t#{category.name}"
    end

    # get details about a category
    category = howcast.category :id => categories.first.id
    puts category.name
    category.subcategories.each do |category|
      puts "- #{category.id}\t#{category.name}"
    end

    # list the videos in a playlist
    playlist = howcast.playlist :id => '4261'
    puts playlist.title
    puts playlist.description
    playlist.videos.each do |video|
      puts "- #{video.id}\t#{video.title}"
    end

Services
--------
To identify what services are supported, you can invoke the `services` class 
method from the `Howkast::API` class:

    Howkast::API.services  # => [:video, :videos, :search, :user, :playlist, :category, :categories]
  
At the time of this writing, this gem implements all of the services listed in 
the [Howcast API Documentation](http://groups.google.com/group/howcast-developers/web/api-documentation)

The current implementation is that each service expects a `Hash` that names 
the parameters required to fulfill the request. The acceptable parameters
(with a minor adjustments to make the parameter names consistent) closely
match the documented service signatures.

Here are some examples to illustrate the service calls. Notice that the `format` 
parameter does not need to be specified and that the `api_key` only needs to 
be set at configuration or when the `Howkast::API` object is created:

### Get Video

    # GET http://www.howcast.com/videos/<video_id>.<format>?api_key=<api_key>
    howcast.video :id => 6570
    
### List Videos

    # GET http://www.howcast.com/videos/<sort>/<filter>/<category>.<format>?api_key=<api_key>
    howcast.videos :sort => :top_rated, :filter => :howcast_studios, :page => 5

### Search Videos

    # GET http://www.howcast.com/search.<format>?q=<query>&view=video&api_key=<api_key> 
    howcast.search :query => 'jujitsu'
    
### List Top-Level Categories
    
    # GET http://www.howcast.com/categories.<format>?api_key=<api_key>    
    howcast.categories

Anyway, you get the idea. 

Read the [Howcast API Documentation](http://groups.google.com/group/howcast-developers/web/api-documentation)
for details.

Models
------
The return value of a service request is an instance of `Howkast::Model` - the
actual type returned depends on the service invoked. 

The rule to determine the type of the response is:

1. The name of the service in singular form dictates the name of the model 
   (eg: `video` returns `Howkast::Model::Video`)
2. If the service name is in plural form, then an `Array` of the expected
   model is returned.
   
The `Howkast::Model` instance returned will have the appropriate attributes
as described in the [Howcast API Documentation](http://groups.google.com/group/howcast-developers/web/api-documentation)

You can examine the list of attributes by invoking the `#instance_attributes`
method of the returned model:

    video = howcast.video :id => 6570
    video.class                # => Howkast::Model::Video
    video.instance_attributes  # => [:id, :category_id, :category_hierarchy, :easy_steps, :badges, :created_at, :filename, :tags, :title, :description, :permalink, :edit_url, :state, :duration, :width, :height, :embed, :rating, :username, :thumbnail_url, :views, :content_rating, :overlay, :ingredients, :markers, :related_videos, :comments]

And of course examine each attribute as needed:

    video.category_hierarchy   # => Array of Howkast::Model::Category
    video.title                # => "How To Drive a Stick Shift" 
    video.related_videos       # => Array of Howkast::Model::Video
    video.markers              # => Array of Howkast::Model::Marker
    video.markers.first.type   # => Step

Errors
------
If a service request fails then a `Howkast::Error::RequestError` error type is
raised. The actual type raised depends on the error.

The following shows several service calls, any one of which may raise an 
error, along with possible ways to deal with the error:

    howcast = Howkast::API.new
    begin
      howcast.user :id => "kreektrebano", :resource => :videos
      howcast.user :id => "jurisgalang",  :resource => :favorite
      howcast.videos :sort   => :most_recent, 
                     :filter => :all, 
                     :page   => 99999999
      howcast.categories
    rescue Howkast::Error::UserNotFound
      # ignore
    rescue Howkast::Error::HTTP404
      # ignore but log, this is raised if the resource requested is not found;
      # eg: specifying a :resource that is not supported, or the :page requested
      # does not exist
    rescue Howkast::Error::InvalidAPIKey
      # the service call requires registration and a valid API key to work
    rescue Howkast::Error::HTTP500
      # ignore but log and file a bug at support+api@howcast.com 
    end

Of the above `Howkast::Error::UserNotFound` and `Howkast::Error::HTTP404` are 
most likely benign.

Read the **HTTP Status Codes and Errors** section of the [Howcast API Documentation](http://groups.google.com/group/howcast-developers/web/api-documentation)
for details on the types of errors that may be encountered.

Gotchas
-------
At the moment, this gem is intended for `Ruby 1.9.x` use only.

Download
--------
You can download this project in either
[zip](http://github.com/jurisgalang/howkast/zipball/master) or
[tar](http://github.com/jurisgalang/howkast/tarball/master") formats.

You can also clone the project with [Git](http://git-scm.com)
by running: 

    git clone git://github.com/jurisgalang/howkast

Note on Patches/Pull Requests
-----------------------------
* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a future version 
  unintentionally.
* Commit, do not mess with rakefile, version, or history. (if you want to have 
  your own version, that is fine but bump version in a commit by itself I can 
  ignore when I pull)
* Send me a pull request. Bonus points for topic branches.

Releases
--------
Please read the `RELEASENOTES` file for the details of each release. 

In general: patch releases will not include breaking changes while releases 
that bumps the major or minor components of the version string may or may not 
include breaking changes.

Author
------
[Juris Galang](http://github.com/jurisgalang/)

License
-------
Dual licensed under the MIT or GPL Version 2 licenses.  
See the MIT-LICENSE and GPL-LICENSE files for details.

Copyright (c) 2010 Juris Galang. All Rights Reserved.

Commit message:

HACK: The Howcast API service responds with HTTP500 error if the :q parameter on search is an empty string - so we plug it with something that *might not* exist and hopefully it will return an empty list :-)

README.md, after:

This gem implements Ruby bindings for the [Howcast](http://howcast.com) API.

From Howcast's [About Us](http://info.howcast.com/about) page:

> Howcast empowers people with engaging, useful how-to information wherever, 
> whenever they need to know how. 
> 
> Known for high-quality content, Howcast streams tens of millions of videos 
> every month across its multi-platform distribution network. Approaching two 
> million downloads across iPhone, iPad, Android, and BlackBerry phones, Howcast 
> is the #1 mobile app for instructional content -- wherever you are.

Install
-------

    gem install howkast

Configure
---------
Most of the service requests require an API key. You can either set this when
you create an instance of `Howkast::API`:

    howcast = Howkast::API.new :api_key => 'YOUR-API-KEY'
    howcast.categories

Or create a configuration that file and set it by invoking the `Howkast::configure`
method:

    # create the configuration file
    cat > ~/.howkast <<EOF
    :api_key: YOUR-API-KEY
    EOF
    
    # now use it
    require 'rubygems'
    require 'yaml'
    require 'howkast'
    
    Howkast::configure YAML.load File.read('~/.howkast')
    howcast = Howkast::API.new
    howcast.categories

Quickstart
----------

    require 'rubygems'
    require 'yaml'
    begin
      require 'howkast'
    rescue LoadError
      $LOAD_PATH.unshift(File.join(File.dirname(__FILE__), '..', 'lib'))
      require 'howkast'
    end

    # configure
    Howkast::configure YAML.load File.read('.howkast')

    # create instance
    howcast = Howkast::API.new

    # alternative instantiation
    # howcast = Howkast::API.new :api_key => 'YOUR-HOWCAST-API-KEY'

    # search for jujitsu how-to videos
    search = howcast.search :query => 'jujitsu'

    # get detail for the first video listed in the search
    video_id = search.videos.first.id
    video    = howcast.video :id => video_id
    puts video.title
    puts video.embed

    # find out what other videos where uploaded by the same user
    username = video.username
    user     = howcast.user :id => username, :resource => :videos
    puts user.title
    user.videos.each do |video|
      puts "- #{video.id}\t#{video.title}"
    end

    # list user's favorite videos
    user = howcast.user :id => username, :resource => :favorites
    puts user.title
    user.videos.each do |video|
      puts "- #{video.id}\t#{video.title}\t#{video.description}"
    end

    # list user's playlists
    user = howcast.user :id => username, :resource => :playlists
    puts user.title
    user.playlists.each do |video|
      puts "- #{video.id}\t#{video.title}"
    end

    # list available categories
    categories = howcast.categories
    categories.each do |category|
      puts "#{category.id}\t#{category.name}"
    end

    # get details about a category
    category = howcast.category :id => categories.first.id
    puts category.name
    category.subcategories.each do |category|
      puts "- #{category.id}\t#{category.name}"
    end

    # list the videos in a playlist
    playlist = howcast.playlist :id => '4261'
    puts playlist.title
    puts playlist.description
    playlist.videos.each do |video|
      puts "- #{video.id}\t#{video.title}"
    end

Services
--------
To identify what services are supported, you can invoke the `services` class 
method from the `Howkast::API` class:

    Howkast::API.services  # => [:video, :videos, :search, :user, :playlist, :category, :categories]
  
At the time of this writing, this gem implements all of the services listed in 
the [Howcast API Documentation](http://groups.google.com/group/howcast-developers/web/api-documentation)

The current implementation is that each service expects a `Hash` that names 
the parameters required to fulfill the request. The acceptable parameters
(with a minor adjustments to make the parameter names consistent) closely
match the documented service signatures.

Here are some examples to illustrate the service calls. Notice that the `format` 
parameter does not need to be specified and that the `api_key` only needs to 
be set at configuration or when the `Howkast::API` object is created:

### Get Video

    # GET http://www.howcast.com/videos/<video_id>.<format>?api_key=<api_key>
    howcast.video :id => 6570
    
### List Videos

    # GET http://www.howcast.com/videos/<sort>/<filter>/<category>.<format>?api_key=<api_key>
    howcast.videos :sort => :top_rated, :filter => :howcast_studios, :page => 5

### Search Videos

    # GET http://www.howcast.com/search.<format>?q=<query>&view=video&api_key=<api_key> 
    howcast.search :query => 'jujitsu'
    
### List Top-Level Categories
    
    # GET http://www.howcast.com/categories.<format>?api_key=<api_key>    
    howcast.categories

Anyway, you get the idea. 

Read the [Howcast API Documentation](http://groups.google.com/group/howcast-developers/web/api-documentation)
for details.

Models
------
The return value of a service request is an instance of `Howkast::Model` - the
actual type returned depends on the service invoked. 

The rule to determine the type of the response is:

1. The name of the service in singular form dictates the name of the model 
   (eg: `video` returns `Howkast::Model::Video`)
2. If the service name is in plural form, then an `Array` of the expected
   model is returned.
   
The `Howkast::Model` instance returned will have the appropriate attributes
as described in the [Howcast API Documentation](http://groups.google.com/group/howcast-developers/web/api-documentation)

You can examine the list of attributes by invoking the `#instance_attributes`
method of the returned model:

    video = howcast.video :id => 6570
    video.class                # => Howkast::Model::Video
    video.instance_attributes  # => [:id, :category_id, :category_hierarchy, :easy_steps, :badges, :created_at, :filename, :tags, :title, :description, :permalink, :edit_url, :state, :duration, :width, :height, :embed, :rating, :username, :thumbnail_url, :views, :content_rating, :overlay, :ingredients, :markers, :related_videos, :comments]

And of course examine each attribute as needed:

    video.category_hierarchy   # => Array of Howkast::Model::Category
    video.title                # => "How To Drive a Stick Shift" 
    video.related_videos       # => Array of Howkast::Model::Video
    video.markers              # => Array of Howkast::Model::Marker
    video.markers.first.type   # => Step

Errors
------
If a service request fails then a `Howkast::Error::RequestError` error type is
raised. The actual type raised depends on the error.

The following shows several service calls, any one of which may raise an 
error, along with possible ways to deal with the error:

    howcast = Howkast::API.new
    begin
      howcast.user :id => "kreektrebano", :resource => :videos
      howcast.user :id => "jurisgalang",  :resource => :favorite
      howcast.videos :sort   => :most_recent, 
                     :filter => :all, 
                     :page   => 99999999
      howcast.categories
    rescue Howkast::Error::UserNotFound
      # ignore
    rescue Howkast::Error::HTTP404
      # ignore but log, this is raised if the resource requested is not found;
      # eg: specifying a :resource that is not supported, or the :page requested
      # does not exist
    rescue Howkast::Error::InvalidAPIKey
      # the service call requires registration and a valid API key to work
    rescue Howkast::Error::HTTP500
      # ignore but log and file a bug at support+api@howcast.com 
    end

Of the above `Howkast::Error::UserNotFound` and `Howkast::Error::HTTP404` are 
most likely benign.

Read the **HTTP Status Codes and Errors** section of the [Howcast API Documentation](http://groups.google.com/group/howcast-developers/web/api-documentation)
for details on the types of errors that may be encountered.

Gotchas
-------
At the moment, this gem is intended for `Ruby 1.9.x` use only.

Currently, Howcast responds with an HTTP500 error when the `:q` parameter 
value is empty the `#search` service plugs this parameter with an asterisk as
placeholder - this however will return a random list of videos.


Download
--------
You can download this project in either
[zip](http://github.com/jurisgalang/howkast/zipball/master) or
[tar](http://github.com/jurisgalang/howkast/tarball/master") formats.

You can also clone the project with [Git](http://git-scm.com)
by running: 

    git clone git://github.com/jurisgalang/howkast

Note on Patches/Pull Requests
-----------------------------
* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a future version 
  unintentionally.
* Commit, do not mess with rakefile, version, or history. (if you want to have 
  your own version, that is fine but bump version in a commit by itself I can 
  ignore when I pull)
* Send me a pull request. Bonus points for topic branches.

Releases
--------
Please read the `RELEASENOTES` file for the details of each release. 

In general: patch releases will not include breaking changes while releases 
that bumps the major or minor components of the version string may or may not 
include breaking changes.

Author
------
[Juris Galang](http://github.com/jurisgalang/)

License
-------
Dual licensed under the MIT or GPL Version 2 licenses.  
See the MIT-LICENSE and GPL-LICENSE files for details.

Copyright (c) 2010 Juris Galang. All Rights Reserved.
